Instinctual Programming
#######################

Programmers often are searching for optimizations to their workflow.
Editors, shell scripts and customizable tools are all examples making
your development experience faster. As a programmer, you dedicate your
life to knowing tools well in order to use them effectively.
Effectiveness with many tools is a matter of making their use
instinctual.

The irony of instinctual programming is that the tools you've become
dedicated to finally get out of the way of your thinking and focusing on
a problem. You find flow in thinking about and solving problems. The
code ceases to be something you are typing into your editor and takes
shape on your screen as though you are publishing your thoughts as you
think them. Your body ceases to act based on your command and instead
listens to an instinct you've developed through dedication to your tools
and environment.

As nice as this may sound it is critical to recognize what I said in my
previous paragraph. The tools you are dedicated to finally get out of
your way. All the tooling and customizations you've made to optimize
your development experience fall away to the background. Many times the
tools you believe really help may actually be standing in the way of
your focus and the natural instincts you have to solve the problem.

I'm not suggesting you shouldn't use powerful tools. I can say from
experience there have been many a time when my job was not to
conceptualize and implement complex algorithms. It was actually mundane
text editing that required next to nothing in terms of critical
thinking. In these cases, mastering my editor became an optimization to
help in hurrying through the mundane to get back to the important work
of the day.

But just as my editor and tools have helped me to optimize the mundane,
they have proven to be distracting. An infinitely customizable piece of
software offers endless optimizations as well as an endless supply of
pointless things to change. Change inhibits instinct. Instinct is when
you body takes over and your mind is free to do other things. There is a
reason cars all have roughly the same interface. Drivers immediately
know how to drive any vehicle and to do so instinctively because they do
not have to think about the basic tasks like steering, breaking and
acceleration.

In the development world this relates to things like working with source
control, build/test scripts and deployment processes. All these things
should be instinctual processes that do not require excessive thinking.
The same goes for documentation. Imagine your favorite programming
language didn't have a central place for documentation. You had to
constantly search for random articles in order to find out how to use
the language. You'd quickly change your opinion of the language and find
something that was more usable.

Instinctual programming is not about optimization. It is about
repetition to the point of mastery. It is important to recognize when
the process you are repeating may not be optimal, but at the same time,
it is important to beware that constant change will never allow you to
act instinctively.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: programming, python
.. comments::
