=================
 Protect Privacy
=================

There have been a ton of discussions regarding privacy recently in
light of Snowden NSA revelations. Many discussions revolve around
encryption, using services outside the US and generally how to make it
difficult for a snooper to read information passed around the
internet. I'm definitely in favor of tools the enable keeping
information private.

At the same time, wouldn't it be better if our understanding of the
internet and technology changed such that the users could be
considered the owners? It seems as though tools like copyright,
professional privilege and unlawful search and seizure should extend
to our life online. Privacy as an ideal should not be limited by the
current technology of the day. Privacy is a concept that should
permeate our laws, no matter the current state of technology.

As an aside, I'd wonder if the RIAA should consider suing the NSA for
copyright infringement. Imagine the number of songs and copyrighted
works that flow through email the NSA might have "copied"
digitally. Anyway...

I'm sure the government is never going to offer its constituency true
privacy. To put it generally, it makes life harder for law
enforcement. If you can't see what people are doing, then how can you
punish (and most importantly tax) them. I have a hunch that there are
still plenty required mediums that make auditing and discovering wrong
doing possible. A warrant is a piece of paper that describes an
exception to privacy. That seems like a pretty reasonable way to go
about finding evidence. After all, we are innocent until proven
guilty.

On the other side of the coin, I believe society could greatly benefit
from a society of privacy. That little black box the insurance
companies want to put in your car would be more appealing if you owned
the data it recorded and could feel safe the government can't simply
ask the insurance companies for the data without proper cause. Smart
phones could be tracking your every move for your own usage, not the
governments. Technology can create new ways of recording and using
data without having to be concerned that user's privacy could be
compromised. There is a world of automation that is available when you
don't have to worry about the data becoming public knowledge.

I don imagine any of this will happen. Most likely our government will
continue to make hidden strides into destroying privacy in order to
maintain power. Technology will try to curb this threat to privacy
and users will become increasingly accepting of big brother watching
everything we do. I only hope that some in our government will realize
the danger of stealing privacy and make a stand to keep it safe both
now and in the future.



.. author:: default
.. categories:: general
.. tags:: privacy
.. comments::
