A Vegas Vacation
################

Lauren and went to Fabulous Las Vegas over the weekend with some friends
to celebrate some birthdays and generally take some time off. Even
though Lauren and I travel quite a bit, it is rarely for fun, so we were
really excited to have some time to have a good time without having to
think about work or getting to the next show.

We stayed in Caesars Palace, which was surprisingly convenient. We have
stayed in the MGM a few times, The Golden Nugget and The Stratosphere
and Ceases was by far my favorite. It seemed to be right in the middle
of everything and it was pretty nice to boot.

If you've never been to Vegas, there is an interesting dichotomy on the
strip and to a lesser extent downtown. Among the high class, gaudy super
hotels like The Bellagio and Caesars there are some old, cheap casinos
like Casino Royale and Bill's that seem out of place. Much like the
downtown hotels, they reflect the traditional feeling of old school
Vegas. They are kind of dirty and run down with lots of mirrors and
classic western appeal. The ceilings are low and reflect a no-nonsense
approach to gambling. You go to play and not to gawk at statues or to
see a show. Fortunately, my favorite places to play, Casino Royale,
Bill's and O'Sheas were all right across the street from Caesars

One advantage of the older small casinos is that they often are a little
looser and offer lower limits on table games. I've relatively consistent
luck playing machines in the older casinos on the strip and downtown,
where as the large casinos seem to always steal my money. This trip my
favorite game to play was craps and the old casinos all had low limit
games, which made my education a much cheaper process. I also found out
that many of the cheaper casinos also allowed betting larger odds bets,
which helped me out on a few big wins.

Outside the typical gambling we also ate some great food. We had a 13
course meal at a place well off the strip called `Abriya Raku`_ that was
phenomenal. It was a mixture of homemade tofu, rare winter mushrooms,
raw and cooked fish along homemade soy sauce. They also had a slick
Japanese toilet in their water themed bathroom, complete with bidet and
heated seat. Needless to say, I want one.

On our last day we ate at `Lotus of Siam`_, which is easily the best
Thai food I've ever had. It is also pretty reasonably priced, which can
be a nice surprise after losing a bunch of money over the course of a
couple days.

Consistent with my theme of enjoying old school vegas, we hit up the
steak house in the El Cortez (one of my favorite casinos). It was
classic Vegas and while the food was relatively standard, the inside
looked like one of the dining rooms in the original Oceans 11. Another
old school steak house we ate at was at the 4 Queens called `Hugo's
Cellar`_. This is a truly great steakhouse serving traditional steaks
cooked to perfection. We had eaten there before this trip and both
experiences were amazing. It is a lot of fun to head into the basement
of an old casino for a great steak with some wine.

After our steak we headed out to play some games downtown and managed to
catch `High on Fire`_ after hearing some brutal heavy music coming from
`Beauty Bar`_. They are a great heavy band that we were really lucky to
see in such a small club with a tiny crowd. To think that I saw them
open for `Mastodon`_ and headline in Austin to a sold out crowd, it was
really cool to see them play a small intimate venue.

We really had an awesome trip. It was first time in a very long time
that coming home wasn't a huge relief. We wanted to stay another day and
secretly hoped we missed our flight so we could priceline a room
downtown and have one more night of fun.

One negative of Vegas is that it can be rather seedy at times. There are
tons of people clicking cards of questionable moral material. Also, it
is sad when you see people gambling who probably should avoid it. Vegas
is definitely a place where people can make poor decisions.

Personally though, I enjoy the games and glam. It is kind of silly and
amazing at the same time. Visiting allows us a chance to live like money
doesn't matter for a few days. You might blow a couple hundred dollars
in an hour or two and it is easy to chalk it up to dumb luck. Some might
think that is extremely wasteful and I can't really deny that, but at
the same time, money isn't everything and being able to experience that
lack of concern makes me really appreciate the things I do have.

One of things I really liked about craps was that there were a whole
table of people having fun playing together. It was fun to watch others
be obnoxious or wear some gaudy outfit. High fiving a person you just
met or throwing a few bucks to the person who rolled the dice and won
you some money is a communal experience. The money your up or down is
not going to change your life, but spending time enjoying the company of
others just might.

.. _Abriya Raku: http://www.raku-grill.com/
.. _Lotus of Siam: http://www.saipinchutima.com/
.. _Hugo's Cellar: http://hugoscellar.com/
.. _High on Fire: http://highonfire.net/
.. _Beauty Bar: http://thebeautybar.com/las_vegas/
.. _Mastodon: http://www.mastodonrocks.com/


.. author:: default
.. categories:: general
.. tags:: life
.. comments::
