A Somewhat More Informed Review of Google Buzz
##############################################

So, now that I've actually used Google Buzz a bit, it seems important to
look back on `my assumptions`_ I raised before actually trying it out.

The basic assumption I was making is that Google Buzz had to do with
email because it is used with Gmail. This was pretty much wildly wrong.
The reality is it just takes twitter/facebook and gives you a page for
it. That's it. I'm not saying that it isn't useful, but it is not what I
hoped.

Some nice things about it have been how easy it is to integrate other
services. Twitter is my micro-blogging-whatever-you-call-140-characters
tool. My blog is for larger ideas and in depth publishing. Delicious and
Google reader, in terms of sharing, both are simply link feeds that can
be very twitter like or similar to a blog. All these tools to seem to
integrate seamlessly with Google Buzz. And by seamlessly, I mean I
didn't have to configure an actual application (facebook) or use OAuth
for anything. The benefit is that I get to use the tools I want and
people following get to do what they want. Perfect.

That said, what's the point. Who really cares if there is yet another
way to share your status. I think twitter does a good job because it is
a constraint. Google Buzz partially fixes that constraint, but that is
not a good thing. Take MySpace for example. They were very strict in
terms of what sort of data showed up on profiles. You had a UI that
essentially had a basic database behind it and it put that information
on the page. Where they let you go crazy was with themes, which I
believe was a side effect. Now look at Facebook. Those guys don't let
you customize anything. It is still the basic info, only you get status
messages. There really isn't much that has changed and the big
difference between the two in my mind is that one let you visually
communicate who you are online while one doesn't. My facebook usage is
by no means authoritative, but the fact that people now use facebook
instead of myspace suggests that no having an option to customize the
look and feel is a good constraint.

Google Buzz on the other hand is only introducing less constraints.
This is not a bad thing, but when they don't offer better ways to keep
in touch then it doesn't matter much. Facebook has the timeline/status
update that allows people to keep up with others. It is a feed reader
for people. Instead of checking out a person's profile and seeing their
animated gif background, they get updated on their own profile page.
People are challenged to post interesting status updates because that is
how they say who they are and communicate with others.

My thought is that if Google Buzz was using email for this, then we'd
be talking. You could pull in those folks that only use email into the
social web. This might be grandpa and grandma or just your friend that
doesn't have any interest in computers. In addition, email could work
with non-browser based clients. This is huge as it means phones could
use out of the box (ahem like another service we've heard of...
twitter). Alas, that was not the case.

The one potential innovation is that you have the concept of a Profile
that is a little more ubiquitous than before. Facebook is a walled
garden. Your Google Profile has more legs. You probably search with
Google, check email with Google, read your feed reader with Google and
possibly use a large set of other services (Picasa, YouTube, Blogger,
etc.). Having a single provider for this is nice. It is also rather
worrisome. The other nice idea about email and Google Buzz is that they
don't have to hold all the cards. Anyone can use email and anyone can
create an email server. This is nice and good for the web. Everyone
using their Google Profile means big brother. Maybe not at first but it
doesn't seem very far fetched that state schools might eventually
require students have a Google Profile for working with certain
software. The next thing you know Google gets involved in the DMV. After
a while you realize that Google TV you bought is telling you to do your
exercises in your living room and calling you specifically by your Gmail
account name to go all the way to floor on your toe touches. Call me
crazy, but it we don't find a way to really distribute identity and
become owners of our virtual property, then we are in some serious
trouble.

.. _my assumptions: http://ionrock.org/blog/2010/02/11/Uninformed_Google_Buzz_Thoughts


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: Uncategorized
.. comments::
