=====================
 Reader and Facebook
=====================


We've lost Google Reader. Facebook continues to suck. Can we please
consider a new way to publish our data?

It always has bothered me that social networks have managed to garner
so much attention when they have so little to truly offer. Social
networks that lack a creative focus (like Facebook, Plus, MySpace and
Twitter) are kind of like pyramid schemes. Users are tasked with
growing the network with friends so they can use it and have a place
to communicate. What is somewhat seedy about it all is that users feel
entitled, when in fact they are slaves to the network. They sign
agreements that provide the social network with the ability to profit
from user's data and network. The social network can change anything
they want and eventually charge for aspects that were previously free.

The first thing that needs to change is users need to own their data.

The other aspect of social networks that seemed off is the actual
network of friends. Most social networks have begun to rally around
facebook and use that as a basis of your network. That doesn't mean
that when you publish data that your network sees it. Facebook started
throttling this sort of thing, most likely because handling the
traversal of the network is expensive when the system is also
responsible for publishing.

The second thing that needs to change is users need to own their list
of friends.

The answer to owning data is to create a blog. It doesn't matter so
much if that blog is on Wordpress.com or is self hosted because a blog
is something you migrate relatively cheaply as services rise and
fall. The answer to owning the friend list is more difficult, but
definitely doable.

Now that Reader is gone, there is an opportunity to start taking
ownership of the friend listing. Each "friend" is a URL to their blog
(or Facebook profile). You subscribe to your friends feeds. When they
get sick of Facebook, or add another slick social network, the feed
reader can be notified in the feed and the user can add the new
network. With that in mind, assuming the social network can post
content to the blog, then the new content can just show up.

The fly in the ointment is that this whole system doesn't have to be
based on advertising. Losing advertising helps users a great deal
because there are less distractions. More importantly though,
applications that want to include content in a person's feed must
actually provide some value and/or enjoyment to that user. If they
don't provide enough value to cause a person to pay for the service,
then they can't survive. If you are a glass half full kind of person,
you'll quickly realize that app developers can focus on writing tools
that help people express themselves rather than having to worry about
scaling up some infrastructure to handle the massive social network
they are creating. While it sounds fun to be tasked with "scaling",
from a business perspective, you can stop paying for servers and
development time.

For this to work there will need to be some re-branding. There needs to
be a change in the social dictionary that provides a name for this
social "Windows 95" moment. The users also need to take ownership of
their content as something of value. I suspect that sharing ad revenue
from the readers applications could be a great motivator here.

I'm not holding my breath that we'll see a huge paradigm shift any
time soon. At some point it has to come though. The amount of money
spent on maintaining a social graph is daunting to say the least. It
is unlikely that we can continue to centralize our resources into
social silos. Eventually, users will see the value in an online
persona they own and won't have a problem paying for the privilege.




.. author:: default
.. categories:: general
.. tags:: social, python, web
.. comments::
