The Skill of Listening
######################

Usually a couple times a year most or all of the remote developers get
together to take some time to meet and reset. The goal is to have some
time together to discuss and design some of the bigger picture details
of our systems as well as work together to sprint on some code.

I remember one specific instance where we had some new developers and we
were discussing some potential changes to our deployment system. One of
the new developers had a rather strong opinion about keeping our own
sources and packaging everything together when we release. My opinion
was the exact opposite of course. It seemed ridiculous to avoid the
convenience things like setuptools and easy\_install for what I thought
was no real gain.

Every once in a while when there is a technical discussion it is helpful
for me to think back to that discussion. My opinions have changed and
now I agree with his points. At the time I had a bias that was
unsubstantiated. The fuel driving me to disagree was really my own close
mindedness to new ideas. It was certainly OK to disagree, but my
resolution should have been to recognize the impasse and contemplate on
the ideas presented. Instead, I was impatient and kept arguing.

None of this was damaging or that heated, but lately I've been thinking
about it a lot along side other technical arguments I've gotten myself
into. The theme I keep coming back to is the importance of listening.
For myself, that means explicitly shutting my mouth and thinking about
the problem. Sometimes it means talking about it to myself out loud or
trying to write some code. The main thing is that I stop arguing and
start listening in order to consider and compare the ideas.

The other thing about listening is that it does not imply that my idea
or direction is wrong. I'm not giving up on the argument or becoming
acquiescent. This is also important because assuming I'm wrong means I'm
not listening to myself and giving my own ideas a chance to mature and
develop.

This process is something that takes a lot of practice and between
writing code and writing music, I get my fair share. The irony is that
only now am I realizing how poor my listening skills actually are, even
though I could have been practicing for most of my life. You never stop
learning.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: music
.. tags:: music, programming
.. comments::
