========================
 Recording Technologies
========================

We are officially back in the studio, which means lots of coffee and
intense focus. At this point in my musical career I feel relatively
confident in my studio expertise that commenting on the technology and
process. Recording music really is a process.

If you have never recorded music you might be surprised to know how
inexact a science it is. You go in trying to find sounds that are vague
ideas to say the least. The parts of the songs that you thought would
sound really great end up being completely wrong. Even though you
practiced like crazy and you tune before every song, you still end up
being sharp because when you play with one finger you're actually
pulling it sharp. Don't even get me started on trying to get actual
sounds.

In terms of technology, recording is surprisingly simple. The most
important pieces of equipment are the compressors. This is not limited
to actual rack compressors, but include anything that squashes sound. A
nice tube mic going to tape sounds good because they are two sources of
fantastic analog compression.

Compressors are also the reason why digital recording is a serious
viable option. Without good natural compression before writing the bits,
you get super clean sounds that just don't sound very good. The
compressors manage to take the sounds and make things listenable.

The analog vs. digital debates in my opinion come down to compression.
First off a compressor does just what its name describes, it takes the
sound wave and sets limits on it. Sometimes the limits are based on
volume but that limit can be relative or absolute. Compression gives you
distortion and overdriven tone. The twang of a guitar sounds the way it
sounds thanks to compression. It is how acoustic sound becomes digital
and why old records feel warm.

It is interesting to know that it is often the sum of small changes
that make things sound good. At the same time starting from extremes is
usually beneficial. People say a tube amp sounds best when loud, but I
would go so far to say that for recording, the first step is to turn
everything up all the way. It can feel pretty scary pushing an amp and
speaker hard, but it also allows for the most natural sounds. The
physical constraints of the material become important at extreme levels
so the overdive sound you can get is actually the natural limits. In
some ways I think it is a carnal sound that actually taps into whatever
part of a person that is still wild and wanting to survive.

The quest to find that carnal greatness is what recording is really
about. The general idea is to capture what makes the music enjoyable.
Likewise, the goal should also be to remove that which is distracting.
All the little details in a song add up one way or another. A single
drum hit or lag in a instrument can ruin a song. While the tones and
sounds need to be carnal, the actual performance needs to be flawless.
When I say flawless, it doesn't mean every beat is exactly the same.

Instead, it means that the way everything works together is correct.

Transitions lead the listener and the song flows.

In terms if making things flawless, this is where technology excels. It
is insanly time consuming to get everyone in a band to play a perfect
take at the same time. There is the execution where no one makes
mistakes, but there is also the performance which is when everyone plays
together just right. In lieu of perfect performances, software can make
all the difference. You can push or pull the drum hits to match
perfectly. If the second verse is played better than the first, just
copy an paste. There are automated tools for syncing a track to a grid,
but the more subtle editing can make a good enough performance make the
cut. The time saved is literally money saved.

The thing about recording now is that it takes so little to try it out.
Garage Band is a great piece of software. We demoed our tracks at almost
every practice and would record things when experimenting. Paying
attention to the mic placement gave us halfway decent results. Garage
Band even seems to do a good job mimicing a the compression of tape, so
when the volume gets too loud, it breaks really nicely.

Ok, I'm done brain vomiting. I need to head back to concentrating on
every single note my wife is shredding on guitar!


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: Uncategorized
.. comments::
