I Finished Life (The Keith Richards Book)
#########################################

Last year at CMJ we played a party for Relics Magazine that was in honor
of Keith Richards biography, Life. I was already on a huge Rolling
Stones kick. When we were on the road, our drummer liked listening to
NPR while driving and we heard Keith's interview about the book every
other day. I finally got to borrow Lauren's parents copy and give it a
spin.
I'm always a sucker for music biographies and documentaries. It is
always really interesting to see where an artist came from and what
sorts of breaks they might have had to help them make their career
something special. Who were they playing with? What did their scene
associate themselves with? Did they work really hard or get extremely
lucky? How involved were they in business side of the music industry?
Were they conscious about being cool or not? All these sorts of
questions are fascinating to me, which made Life right up my ally.
As something well written and easy to read, Life falls in the average
category. The biographer added very little of his own words to clarify
the story and Keith's messages. The result is that it really reads as a
long rambling lecture from Keith Richards. The positive side of this is
that you get a somewhat clear vision of Keith as a musician, what his
perspective is in terms of making music and how he would work. The
downside is that some of it feels somewhat out of proportions of
reality.
The big story of course is the relationship between Keith and Mick.
There is also plenty of info regarding the loves of Keith's life, but I
think they are traditionally secondary to the larger story of the
Stones. The Keith/Mick divide seems almost predestined with infidelity
between the two friends. You get the impression that it is something
that just goes with rock'n'roll, but I have a feeling those sorts
explanations are more a function of expectations than an actual reality.
The interesting thing is how Keith describes the song writing process.
He would start and Mick would finish. That is a pretty interesting model
b/c I think it has parallels to how Lauren and I write. The reality is
Lauren does the majority of work here, but in terms of providing and
important ingredient that helps define the sounds, I think we have a
similar relationship. That said, I kind of get the impression that there
are times Mick is actually doing the majority of work, even though Keith
explains otherwise. I'm not slighting Keith as a song writer here, but
as a musician, it is pretty easy to come up with riffs. Taking a song
from a riff or chorus to a great song is a tough road.
This is the overarching issue of believe-ability with Life that kind of
gets on my nerves. It all seemed so easy. The drugs, sex and rock'n'roll
seem heavy, and yet Keith handles it all in stride. Either he is not
telling the truth regarding how hard is working (it is not cool to let
people see you sweat) or he really had massive amounts of help (from
Mick for example, working to make the Stones what they were). No matter
how far from the truth Life wanders, it is fascinating to see the life
through the eyes of a great musician like Keith Richards. I'm a fan and
a musician myself, so I'm probably biased, but finding that you find
certain songs (Gimme Shelter, Can't You Hear Me Knocking, Street
Fighting Man) hold a similar place in the original writers perspective
is cool. I have a huge amount of respect for Keith Richards and I think
Life goes a long way in demystifying the legend while exposing that no
matter what your opinions are, he is a lover of music.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: music
.. tags:: music
.. comments::
