======================================
 My New Pedal and Some Soldering Tips
======================================

Over the weekend I managed to finish up my `pedal kit`_! I did have one
cold joint on the actual switch that needed to be re-soldered, but other
than that, it went off without a hitch. When I was in high school and
listened to a lot of guitar dude bands (this was before listening to
guitar dude bands was "cool"), I was always impressed when I heard some
member of the band could work on equipment. I think it was either
Journey or Yes whose guitarist designed his own distortion pedal and
Brian May (Queen) built his guitar. The idea that you could go and
change your sound beyond turning a knob was always enthralling.

While my actual role in getting the pedal working was pretty much just
soldering joints, it is obvious I'm just starting out. Still, I'm really
proud that I was able to do it right the first time around and now have
a pretty respectable pedal for it. It also makes me really excited to
start on another one! As my biggest accomplishment was soldering, it
became clear there were some techniques that help to make nice clean
joints.

I found when soldering onto the board, the goal is to get the solder to
drop onto the joint. When you see a joint on a commercial product, there
is perfect little dab of solder on the joint that looks like a tiny
concave cone. This cone is what I'm describing when I say "dropping" the
solder. This is not some term I picked up anywhere else, so don't go
walking into your amp repair shop saying you think some joint was bad
because the solder on the joint never dropped. When it happens, you see
the tiny ball of hot molten solder disperse onto the board. It
disconnects from the iron and flows down to the connection on the board
and wraps perfectly around the lead you're soldering.

One of the best things to help make this happen is keeping you tip well
tinned. This is something everyone says to do without really describing
why. Tinning, in my limited experience, acts like a lubricant of sorts
that lets the solder fall off the tip of the iron easily. It also makes
heating up the solder much faster. Both of these characteristics help a
great deal to make a good joint. The solder naturally will make a nice
joint when it drops onto the board, but getting it to do it is where the
challenge comes in. A well tinned tip is a great place to start.

Once you're actually starting to solder, there are couple things that
help to get the solder to disperse on the board. You can make the angle
of the iron more vertical. This makes any solder on the iron tend to go
towards gravity, which will get the solder to flow on the connection.
Sometimes, I would even tap it slightly to get the solder moving down
the tip. One thing I should point out is that I'm not adding solder to
the tip first and then putting it on the board. When you go to solder
the joint, you usually have to end up touching the solder to the tip
slightly and the solder tends to naturally end up on the iron. The quest
then is to get it from the iron to the joint. You can also do thing like
twisting the iron slightly and moving it around the joint. Sometimes
this gets the solder to latch onto the lead, which will provide enough
momentum to get it down on the board.

When you spill a liquid on carpet, sometimes it just sits on the
surface and doesn't actually sink in. This sinking in is what you want
with the solder. If you've ever touched liquid that hasn't sunk into
carpet, you saw very quickly that once that seal was broken, it quickly
soaked into the fibers. Again, things like moving the iron, tapping and
getting the solder to slide off the iron all help break that seal and
let the solder drop on the board.

In addition to trying to get solder off the iron, you can avoid getting
it on the tip of the iron in the first place. When you place the solder
on the joint, try to touch the solder to the iron while touching the
solder to the joint as well. This can let the solder immediately flow on
the joint, at which point you're golden. You can push a hair more solder
on and brag to your friends how your hands are better than machines. I
think the guys that are really good have learned to do this aspect
really well, so it is something that will becomes easier with practice.
I'm no expert but I did manage to do a decent job on my joints. I could
still do better and next time I'm definitely going to try. But overall,
using the above techniques and understanding of how the solder worked
made a huge difference getting decent connections when soldering pieces
to the board.


.. _pedal kit: http://olcircuits.com/olc_chunkycheese.html


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: Uncategorized
.. comments::
