===========================
 Crazy Heart Communication
===========================

Last night we saw Crazy Heart. It is a pretty typical story about a
drunk country singer who makes an effort to change late in life. I can't
say that the story was really all that original, it has some great
acting that really helps to relate to the characters. The musical side
of things also felt very real. The way he wrote songs and traveled
around in a old suburban, sleeping in dumpy motel rooms and playing
terrible places was all right in line with real life. It was obvious he
had some success at some point in his life, but that was well behind
him. The film presented a realistic picture of a working musician that
had found success and lost it over time.

The movie portrays a rather realistic view of a working musician.

What's more, it shows a rather realistic perspective of song writing in
general. If you write a good song, it should sound a feel like other
songs, even though it might be completely different. That is not to say
you should rip off other songs, but rather you consider the audience.
The older I get the more I realize how important it is to consider your
audience when communicating. It is a huge challenge to put yourself in
someone else's shoes and consider their influences and perspectives on
different topics and use that information to make your own point.

Songs are most definitely a form of communication both through the
lyrics and with the music. If you listen to music, there is huge segment
of popular music that uses a basic back beat. This is where the snare
usually hits on the second and fourth beat of a measure or phrase. This
is because it is a such a popular beat that it is in so many songs. My
guess is that it will continue to be a critical aspect in music for
years to come, simply because it gives listeners something to
immediately feel comfortable with.

I'd definitely recommend Crazy Heart. Not so much because the story is
so enduring, but simply because it clearly communicates the difficult
life of a working musician. The long drives through beautiful country
only to end up at a dirty bar (or bowling ally in the movie) with the
appreciation of one or two fans making it all worthwhile. I think part
of the appeal of music is that you have that opportunity to communicate
on such a different level where the ideas and concepts are less
important than transferring some set of emotions through sound. Even
though it can feel pretty thankless at times, it also doesn't take much
to know you've made that connection.



.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: Uncategorized
.. comments::
