===================================
 Ideas for Starting a Record Label
===================================

Lately I've been thinking about record labels. Not the majors but the
small and relatively successful indie labels. There are still a set of
popular indies that despite the downturn in the music industry have
seemed to thrive. I'm talking about labels like Matador, Merge, Subpop,
KRS, etc. By thrive, I mean they manage to be financially viable selling
music. Of course, this is an assumption on my part. For all I know they
might be simply living on the revenue of past releases. No matter what
their books look like, it is clear that they are successful by some
measure. I think if someone were to start a label there are definite
things to take from the experience of these labels.

A label needs to represent a brand. KRS is a good example here. They
started and represented female musicians and embraced accepting a
person's sexual identity. While I don't know that it has the same vision
now, it definitely still maintains its brand. Previously labels that had
a good brand had the opportunity to garner a captive audience. Fans were
not only fans of certain bands, but they were fans of labels. The label
acted as a filter and there were not very many resources for finding
music at the time. While this isn't the case anymore, a label that
creates a real brand creates a story. The name of the game is selling
music and the way to do that is to let people hear it. The best way to
get music heard is through the web and the influence of hundreds of
bloggers alongside music websites. The label's brand then allows this
influence to percolate to the bloggers instead of to the people
directly. Those that publish need a story and a brand helps to provide
that story.

In the indie world, the brand should represent a mission. Again, using
KRS as an example, when they started, they had a mission of getting
experimental and punk inspired music based partly on gender to those
interested. It was definitely a niche, but they in turn helped define a
genre through bands like Bikini Kill and Sleater Kinney. They succeeded
in their mission. Starting a label means having a mission. It is
important to see the mission as something that is not financial.

Dischord is another example of a label with a mission. They aimed to
raise awareness of the DC music scene. A mission is something fans
respect and want to be a part of. It lets a fan know that instead of
supporting some money grabbing record label, they are providing great
bands a means to put out music.

Lastly, if I were to start a record label, it would be regionally
focused. This is partly because I live in Austin, but it also helps to
reveal a mission as not only an idea, but a place. It doesn't have to be
a label that resides in a huge city either. Polyvinyl helped represent
mid-west indie and (non-eyeliner) emo. They did this from the small
college down of Champagne, IL. The idea though is to create a scene. The
scene is really nothing more than a community. It doesn't have to
represent a single sound, but it does need to have some sense of
originality that identifies it. This identity is critical for everyone
involved, the band and the label.

The music industry now requires bands create a brand. It is no longer
enough to simply be in a band, just as it is no long enough to put out
CDs. You need to have the band and the people surrounding the band
representing something larger. This is obviously good for a band, but it
is also good for a label because it allows success beyond one artist.
I think Josh Homme or Jack White is a good example of this concept. You
have some sense of success that helps to further other projects. The
first successes don't need to be that large as long as they tell a
story. A band might have only played a few shows but have been ingrained
as someone important within some scene. If that person starts another
band or project, the story is clear that amidst the short turbulent yet
influential series of events that was the previous band, arose a new and
innovative project. It is a really common thread you see today where
members quickly work on side projects in between albums. One might
consider it a overflow of music, but I'd argue that these musicians
realize that they need to constantly produce content and understand that
one way to do so is to expand the brand of a single band to that of its
members. Animal Collective is a good example of this as well as Neon
Indian.

This last aspect of creating the brand is the key aspect for a new
label. If a label can help bands establish this brand then I think a
label can be successful by associating their own brand with that of the
band. The label can be a huge supporter or a bank. If I were to start a
label I would do everything I could to help partner with a band to
create their personal brand. That means tons of small releases, cheap
videos and help with lots of web content. It means making things happen
and telling the story. In the past labels were in the position where
they would throw things on the wall to see what sticks. That can't
happen anymore. There are too many bands. What should happen is that the
label should be similar to a manager in that they make every effort to
forward the career of the band. This needs to be the core mission of
anyone starting a label. Money is not going to happen by chance, you
have to make every band profitable to make money. This also means the
bands cannot sit idly by and wait for the big recording budget and tour
support. It needs to be a partnership where everyone establishes their
brand in order to tell their story and spread the music.

Unfortunately, I don't have the time to run a label. But if I did, the
above would be my priority. I'd have a label of local Austin bands that
tell the state of the Austin music scene and establish the Austin sound.
It would all encompassing in sound and would make every effort to get
the music outside of Austin. You never know, maybe I'll win the lottery
and see what happens!


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: Uncategorized
.. comments::
