===========================
 Creativity in New Mediums
===========================


Thingpunk_ is the idea that we apply the design of physical things to
all mediums, in spite of our new networked digital world. With the web
providing a new medium and platform for expression that is wholly
outside of the physical realm, how do we allow users to be creative
without forcing an understanding of the underlying technology?

There is a market for empowering users to create interesting digital
content. There a huge number of photo editing apps for your phone and
computer. Instragram is an excellent example, yet it also reflects the
Thingpunk aestethic. The photos are not being edited into something
new. Instead they are given treatments to make them appear from
another time where physical film was a necessity.

Looking back at film photography, it was possible for anyone to
experiment with the same techniques as professional photographers. The
amateur could easily play with different f-stops or apertures and see
the result. There isn't the same analogy when it comes to digital
content as a whole. Even a reasonably simple tool such as CSS is
rarely edited by every day users to customize or "remix" their web
browsing experience. The chasm between user and creator is too great.

The technical divide is truly tragic. Imagine students creatively
dissecting terabytes of data. Social networks become pointless when
people can simply compose their own graph of relationships, pointing
them to each person's identity (real and created) on the web. The
walled gardens for content can finally come down because the masses
have the ability to stake a claim and start a business without
technical gatekeepers.

As a programmer, my wish is that people would take the time to learn,
but that wish is naive. My wife proves this to me every day when we
send links via email. Even though the information she needs is a
single search term away, I am called upon to find it, package it in an
email message and send it, knowing the process will be repeated. This
is a failure of our technology.

There are small nuggets of creativity that suggest a future in the
machine. Infographics are data centered communication that mix visual
design and textual data to communicate effectively and
creatively. Currently, creating an Infographic requires analyzing some
data that is typically in some technical silo such as a remote
database or set of data files.

Imagine if users could create a spreadsheets of any data
point. Anything from text messages to receipts would be interesting to
look at. ::

      +----------------------------------------------------------------------+
      |  # of Texts to Mom                                                   |
  +---+======================================================================+
  | 1 | =SUM([1 for text in PULL(mobile://alltexts) if text.contains(mom)])  |
  +---+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

The specific cases aren't difficult to implement, but a system where
general data exists in a meaningful way and can be accessed is
extremely difficult. Yet, it is necessary that we force our computers
to do the work. The mundane is where our machines excel.

The fear of "Big Brother" goes away if users are empowered and given
control. We are concerned about privacy because users must rely on
others to provide the technical benefits. What if that barrier didn't
exist? What if true amateurs could take control of their data and
safely share details they deem fit? What if they could sell that data
themselves? Most importantly, what does the digital medium look like
when any user can play with the same settings as the professionals?

While we patiently wait for users to learn the power of personal
computing there are steps we can take right now. Hadoop_ is a great
example of an ecosystem trying to provide general users with massive
analytical power. There are multitude of `languages
<http://www.tom-e-white.com/2008/06/hadoop-query-languages.html>`_ and
`systems <http://hive.apache.org/>`_ that provide non-programmer types
the means to query huge amounts of data. While it is still far from
being generally accessible, it is a start.

Creativity and design are dependent on experimentation. Musicians
"jam" to find melodies and rhythms. Painters sketch ideas before
committing them to ink. Tools such as Photoshop provide features such
as layers and locks in order to allow users a way of experimenting and
iterating on their work. We are far from riffing on our data and
publishing it to the new medium of the web, with the result being we
still live in a world ruled by Thingpunk design.


.. _Thingpunk: http://urbanhonking.com/ideasfordozens/2013/05/07/on-thingpunk/
.. _Hadoop: http://hadoop.apache.org/


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: programming
.. comments::
