A Busy New Year
###############

I've been slacking on my writing this year thanks to life getting in the
way. With that in mind, I have had a couple small things I wanted to
post about even if they don't really need a full fledged blog post.

`Dad`_
------

I'm coming the conclusion the biggest advantage of Dad is that is really
light weight and simple. This is a good thing in development but I don't
know that in production it is missing important features. I plan to keep
playing with the idea, but other tools are already doing a good job
managing processes.

`Xenv`_
-------

Xenv on the other hand is proving to be more useful. I recently read
`how to make chroot jail`_ and it occurred to me how Xenv provides a
similar yet different use case. The key difference is that a chroot jail
aims to create a new system from scratch, effectively copying everything
in some existing system. Xenv on the other hand tries to provide a
simple layer on top of an existing system. From a `DevOps`_ perspective,
the Xenv gives developers a way to meet their requirements without
clobbering sysadmins. This may seem contrary to DevOps, but in larger
organizations or even when someone is better as a sysadmin than a
programmer, having an easy way to layer requirements means a smoother
transition from development to deployment.

Singing
-------

Unbeknownst to most, I've been taking vocal lessons. My goal is to help
improve my speaking voice as well as help me start singing a bit. I
don't have any really concrete goals at this point, but it is something
I'd like to do. A bit of formal training goes a long way in getting a
better idea of what might be a good goal and gives me tools to get
there.

What is interesting about the methodology is how little it has to do
with singing. Instead it is understanding how you naturally vocalize
sound and training your body to do the same thing when you "sing" as
when you speak. The process is simply singing scales using different
vowel and consonant sounds. It is like free weights for your voice. I
can say with confidence that it has already made a big difference in the
shower and on the Karaoke stage.

Recording
---------

We've been demoing some tracks to show to folks who might be interested
in working with us in the future. The biggest thing I've learned this
time around is how important is to be confident in your sounds. This
predicated by taking time outside of the studio to practice and really
understand your sound. If you are able go in with confidence it goes a
long way to saving time. You aren't trying a million things trying to
figure out how something can sound. Instead, you have the sound and you
merely need to capture it.

Hopefully I can get back to a more regular writing schedule, but in the
mean time I'll keep collecting my thoughts whenever possible.

.. _Dad: http://bitbucket.org/elarson/dad
.. _Xenv: http://bitbucket.org/elarson/xenv
.. _how to make chroot jail: http://intertwingly.net/blog/2012/01/04/Bootstrapping-Debian-Unstable
.. _DevOps: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DevOps


.. author:: default
.. categories:: general
.. tags:: general, programming
.. comments::
