=================================
 Uninformed Google Buzz Thoughts
=================================

I haven't tried Google Buzz. Since I moved to using Emacs for email and
have tried to focus on using my own domain name, using Gmail proper
isn't really happening. But! From what I've read I think the ideas (that
I've gathered) are really interesting.

Email is a really great platform. Not technically, but from a social
perspective. Email is more ubiquitous than the web. There are no client
issues when it comes to core functionality and everyone knows how to use
it. What's more, many folks are expert users that do complex tasks like
create folders and filters. This is complicated compared to opening up
your email and only reading and deleting.

With a world of people using email every day, it is a no brainer to
consider how to create social software with it. `Posterous`_ is a great
example of an application that exploits the power of email to help
people publish. Google Buzz, being based on email is doing the exact
same thing.

I have a facebook account that I don't really use. I try to user
twitter as a publishing platform, but ideas are hard to come by at
times. Email I use everyday. It is something that is now a requirement
for getting things done in the world. A tool that helps graph a social
network based on email is idea because it is yet another helpful tool
based on email to improve its place as the ultimate web communication
tool.

Now, since I really don't know the specifics of what Google Buzz is
doing, my "analysis" is going to stop right there. But, I do have a wish
list for the future of email that is based off of tools like Gmail.

1. Create and API - Oh how I wish Gmail had a really good API that
wasn't IMAP. Personally, I'm totally fine with IMAP, but it is not going
to scale email to where it needs to be. Gmails labels are powerful and
help to provide more options for organizing email. The search in Gmail
is also really great in terms of the UI. It is trivial to see all your
unread items in any set of folders that contain someones name in the
subject. I'll also bring up the spam filtering that I never notice,
which is just proof that I appreciate it.

2. Build an Open Source Email Server - Yeah I know there are tons
already, but I'm talking about one that speaks HTTP and uses a RESTful
API like the one mentioned above. Something anyone could implement that
doesn't have the cruft of IMAP even though it might be supported.

3. Create More Organizational Paradigms - I think email is really
important because of the audience. Everyone uses email, period. Yet,
overloading it has always been a problem thanks to spammers. That is OK,
as I think spam is essentially licked. With spam out of the way, we can
start to consider other ways of organizing our mail. If you take a look
at Gmail Labs, many of them provide extra tools for helping to organize
your life in email. There are todo lists, extra inboxes, emblems and
more that are all focused on improving your mail experience. This needs
to continue if we want to continue to overload email with the social
web.

So that is. I hope Google is listening (the company, not the search
bot) and considers the future. What is funny is that on a personal
level, I'm not really a fan of email. It is not something I enjoy or
find that interesting. Yet, when you think of ways to get people to use
an API, email always wins. I used email for mimicking a text message
platform. Why? All the carriers support sending text messages by email.
Mailman the mailing list software has allowed managing lists via email
forever. Email marketing (not spamming) as a market is still rather
vibrant with new companies showing up all the time improving the
experience for readers. Like the web browser, email is not going
anywhere and it is extremely pervasive. Email as the interface to the
social web seems like the logical next step.


.. _Posterous: http://posterous.com


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: Uncategorized
.. comments::
