Libertarian Programming
#######################

If you haven't already read it, Steve Yegge wrote a post providing an
`axis of alignment`_ for programmers. The basic idea is that programmers
tend to fall on spectrum between liberal and conservative based on the
aversion to risk.

For the most part I get it and can agree to an extent. My one beef is
that the perspective on risk seems rather one sided. The question of
whether something will break for users is only part of the story. The
boring nature of "conservative" developers might appear to be solely in
fear for the user's well being, but in my experience, the aversion of
risk actually involves everyone involved with the code.

People, while having some pretty strong differences, still have survival
instincts. If you are getting burned, your natural instincts kick in and
you move extremely quickly. In other scientific fields, we've been
burned plenty of times and as such, our industries reflect good
instincts. Companies have had to shut their doors due to mistakes and
carelessness, which in turn "burned" the entire industry in such a way
as to cause an instinctual reaction.

Why is it in programming we haven't seen a similar trend? Sure, we've
seen source control and the Joel Test become relatively standard, but
past that, what have we learned as an industry that is clearly the best
practice for everyone involved in coding?

I have a theory why we have been somewhat slow developing our survival
instinct.

If you follow sites like Slashdot, Hacker News and Reddit, you'll see
articles come up every once in a while that deal with age and
programming. A quick search for "programming age" quickly returns some
examples questioning if age is a limiting factor for a programmer.
Generally, programming is considered to be something for the young, even
if we don't say so out right.

The result of this subtle ageism is that we often think new concepts can
only come from young minds who have yet to be jaded by the old ways of
thinking. The liberal programmers who don't acquiesce to the
conservative curmudgeon down the hall are the ones who will truly
revolutionize the industry. As a culture, the new technology is what is
most important, with the youth having the loudest voice.

Steve suggests that the longer you are a programmer and experience the
pains of failure, you become more risk averse, hence becoming more
conservative. I'd argue that the real risk you are adverse to involves
spreading incomprehensible code and wasting the time of those that will
come after you.

The developers I respect most have a knack for taking old code that
makes no sense and turning it into clear and concise code with tests,
tooling and documentation. Even though they are not making huge strides
in new user functionality or creating new models for dealing with big
data, they are exponentially saving the precious time of every other
developer that works on the code. The potentially boring decisions and
technology they used manages to hide complexity so effectively, it never
seems to rear its head again.

If I were to put a political category on this line of thinking, I'd say
it was Libertarian. New technology is great, as long as it doesn't
effect the liberty of other developers. Every new feature and bug fix
should be tested for validity as well as reviewed in light of whether it
adversely effects the ability of other developers to work on the code.

If I were describe myself, I'm a libertarian programmer. My desire is to
write code that helps the users while staying out of the way of others I
work with. I don't always do a great job of this, but I'll claim the
naivete of youth and mention that I'm listening to my elders in order to
overcome my lack of understanding.

Passionate programmers are going to disagree. It can be helpful to put
terms on the different perspectives because, as Steve says, it provides
an easy way to agree to disagree. At the same token, our industry makes
a lot of mistakes and assumes that our flexibility and disagreements are
simply clashes of opinion. The fact is our metric is often too focused
on the result without considering the means. The time we save our users
can be exponentially increased by saving our developers time.

The next time you find it difficult to read some code or set of tests it
might be worthwhile to consider what impact your code has on others. The
freedom you feel when writing new code is because you have not been
encumbered by the code of others. There is no reason that when you are
working on code others have written, the same freedom is not possible.
As a libertarian coder, my goal is to write code that protects liberty
of my fellow programmer.

.. _axis of alignment: https://plus.google.com/u/0/110981030061712822816/posts/KaSKeg4vQtz


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: programming
.. comments::
