=========
 Regions
=========

One of the interesting things about copyright is that it is not
universal. Every country has different rules regarding what rights an
author has when creating a work. Another added complexity is that
copyrights are not traditionally granted universally. It is common to
negotiate different licenses across different regions. This is
beneficial because if your content is generating revenue in one region,
it is more likely to be well received elsewhere.

As a musician, this has its benefits. If you put out your own record in
the US, it might help get you a really good deal with a label in Canada
and the UK. Some bands have also found success in the US by first
finding an audience in Europe. This whole scenario rarely occurs for
artists on major's though because most majors have branches in other
regions. Also, a major will traditionally provide a rather healthy
advance to make the record. This usually ends up meaning they own the
masters, which in turn means they control the use of those masters.

While this separation of markets can be profitable for an artist, it
also provides a level of complexity. When you release your music, it is
trivial to also include iTunes in foreign markets. If you do this, it
hurts your chances of finding a label. It can be effective to go without
a label, when you are talking about a foreign country it is much more
difficult. It is hard to know who is a reputable press person or booking
agent. If you do try to promote your record in another country, how can
you be sure the people working with you are legitimate? How can you hold
them accountable? Do you have any legal recourse if something goes bad?

It is tough enough to be a band, book tours, and record in one country.

Taking it worldwide is only that much harder.

For us it is frustrating at times because we've gotten requests from
folks over seas wanting to buy our music. Services like `Bandcamp`_ are
great, but they don't help in these situations because they don't have a
way to limit by region. It is also difficult to find similar services in
other countries. If they are out there I haven't found them. Another
option is to just do the geo filtering myself, but that is a lot of code
to write for a pretty limited number of sales. That is not to say these
sales don't mean anything, but rather, it is tough to justify the work.

Especially if we did end up finding a label in the UK or Europe.

It is an interesting problem because the way of the web is global, yet
the content is not. It makes the argument that ISPs should act like
utilities a little more complicated. A utility provides a resource that
they create or purchase. An ISP provides a link to a network of
resources they have no control over whatsoever. Not that I'm advocating
ISPs do region filtering, but it seems like it does add a subtle hint of
gray to the whole issue.

If anyone does know a non-US version of bandcamp please let me know. My
other option is to keep a close eye on `CASH`_ and hopefully find some
solutions.

.. _Bandcamp: http://umemusic.bandcamp.com
.. _CASH: http://cashmusic.org


.. author:: default
.. categories:: music
.. tags:: music
.. comments::
