Devops Mindset
==============

I've never said it, but I've never really been a fan of the devops
concept. I have no problem with developers doing deployments or having
root access to servers or something silly like that. My main complaint
is that the divide between a sysadmins and developers is helpful as it
forces an interface and protocol. I'm now thinking that perspective was
wrong.

The devops movement always seemed to be born of the startup trend where
developers are hired and must be responsible for every part of the
system. Services like Amazon EC2 only made it a logical position to
create in a small company that aims to build on the shoulders of giants.
Seeing as I have no historical context to say whether my assumption was
right or not, I'll assume it was correct for the purpose of making my
point.

The real impact of devops is providing empathy for both concerns in
applications and system design. When you throw away the preconceived
misconception each type of stake holder has, there are some really
powerful solutions that can be created that help everyone out. The
developers can write code to help cross the chasm between development
and production while sysadmins can have their needs met more intimately
with applications packaged and written with the system in mind.

In a way it is simply an optimization. Prior to devops, the consensus
was that there was an actual wall you had to work around. Devops doesn't
remove the wall, but instead suggest that both sides work to build doors
and windows that each can depend on. This is a much better situation.
I'm glad I finally started to see it.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: devops, programming, python
.. comments::
