The New Boss
############

I finally got around to reading "`Meet The New Boss, Worse Than The Old
Boss?`_\ ". The `one response`_ I did read concluded with a prime
example of the tech industry mindset the author feels is foul. Seeing as
I have a lot of respect for `the author`_, it was frustrating to see
such a lack of empathy.

I don't believe that vocal artists who are frustrated with the music
industry are whining. Most articles or presentations are done by
respected members of the music industry. These are people who have found
some success by creating something people actually wanted to listen to.
Because they have found some success, it seems reasonable that they
recognize the risk in the music industry as well as the difficulty in
making good music.

When someone is frustrated by the music industry it is important see if
they really are a part of the industry or just play in a band that no
one really listens to. Of course, by this logic you could probably
disqualify myself. Seeing as we have managed to find some success, I
hope you read on, but if not, I more than understand.

The New Boss article aims its sights directly at the tech industry. In
my opinion it is accurate in its portrayal. As a programmer who made an
effort to make a music start up work, I can say with out a shadow of a
doubt that the tech start up community feels that innovation is more
important than copyright. Musicians and labels should feel privileged
that iTunes is willing to host an album's worth of material and be
provided a paragraph for a short description.

It might be rude of me to say this, but actions speak louder than
words. I can get a web host for $10 / month that has enough space to
store every album I ever make as mp3s. I can add a Wordpress blog and a
link to download the track after paying along with Disqus comments and
get effectively what I get with iTunes. The difference of course is that
if I sell 10k songs, I still pay $10 for hosting (maybe more for
bandwidth... maybe) where as on iTunes you pay $3k. That sort of pricing
is pretty foul if you ask me when you have a band touring, creating
content on social networks and paying for press.

There is still hope though. The key is to be smart.

At some point my hope is that the market corrects itself. Artists are
getting smarter about their contracts and demanding they own their
copyrights. Tools like Kickstarter do offer some options for skipping
middlemen. Labels are finding better tools to protect casual pirates.
Record labels can consider their successful artists as huge bargaining
chips in order to bring in more revenue. Technology like `Cash Music`_
could be used to implement a distributed store where artists can sell
music directly through a centralized user interface. We need to work
together.

I'm not going to argue that bands should be paid huge advances and the
major label system was better. But, I do think the tech industry has
convinced the world that music should be free. Changing this is going to
involve adjusting the market.

There is a reason it took a long time before The Beatles and Pink Floyd
showed up on iTunes with higher prices than other records. The copyright
holders felt the music had more value and negotiated a better deal as
seen by a higher price on the store. This theme is a good thing.
Hopefully indie labels will join a coalition to act collectively in
order to secure higher revenue. Majors can also demand that they
function on an artist by artist basis. If it becomes prohibitively
expensive for tech companies to maintain the gateway to online music,
they will stop and others will come in their place with tools that can
empower those making music.

.. _Meet The New Boss, Worse Than The Old Boss?: http://thetrichordist.wordpress.com/2012/04/15/meet-the-new-boss-worse-than-the-old-boss-full-post/
.. _one response: http://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/201x/2012/05/26/The-New-Boss
.. _the author: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_Bray
.. _Cash Music: http://cashmusic.org/


.. author:: default
.. categories:: music
.. tags:: music
.. comments::
