======================
 Mobile is the Future
======================

I read a great article the other day by someone who used to work at
Nokia on how the US is so radically different than the rest of the world
when it comes to cellular technology. It was really interesting to see
how Nokia as a company was driven by research in its own local market,
which happened to be a great predictor of how the rest of the world uses
mobile phones. What was also really interesting was the impact of SMS on
the mobile industry, and more specifically, for carriers in terms of
profits. These profits (along with a wildly different geography) also
seemed to help with providing better service to carrier customers. For
example, no one wanted antenna on their phones because they got in the
way of putting it in your pocket. In the US though, an antenna meant
better reception and fewer dropped calls. That never happened, so users
just assumed the phone always worked.

Articles like this are really interesting as programmer because
reinforces the importance gathering data. Nokia's reel claim to fame in
the story is its research. It payed closed attention to its users and
acted accordingly. As a result, Nokia sell millions of phones at a
really high price all over the world and have customer loyalty. While it
is something I'm not very good at, it is a good reminder that being able
to gather data can make the difference between tweaking a setting and
rewriting an application. A wrong hypothesis can be expensive, and data
helps to make better guesses as to what the problem is. It is something
I personally want to get better at.

The other theme of the article is the importance of mobile in terms of
technology. The author described impact of SMS on the industry, which
was enormous. Any company that has a technology focus needs to see the
importance of mobile phones as a platform. Also, the platform is not the
iPhone. The author made it clear that the iPhone application business
model doesn't work, which is something I have felt for a while now. The
numbers just aren't there. You sell the app for a couple bucks to a
million people and you might have made a couple million dollars. But
that's it. There is nothing else to really be done except releasing
updates and hope people keep buying it. The problem is that if it gets
extremely popular, there is a really good chance Apple will just release
its own version and put you out of business. The other tact is to
release system services for other companies to use, but again this seems
like a bad idea. You're selling some service to the guy that only make a
few million dollars off some application. Some percentage of those sales
is pretty weak in terms of revenue and you still have the same problem
of Apple simply destroying your business by releasing their own version.
Apps just don't make sense in the long term and doesn't reflect the rest
of the world.

The reason for all this is that defaults rule. SMS changed everything
because it was a built-in feature of every phone. There are tons of
phones now with data plans, but the reality is that everyone texts. This
is not because texts are better than Safari or Twitter, but because
interoperability is taken care of. The web flourished because browsers
felt the same. The mobile industry gets the same feeling from SMS. The
article states that every day users won't buy apps and after thinking
about it a bit, I have to agree. The one thing that could change that
would be the iPad. The iPad has the opportunity to change the way people
think of computers and it is built completely on the idea of apps.

Before you had a filesystem and there was a disconnect between files and
applications. The iPad is destroying that assumption and people seem to
appreciate the simplicity. If the new assumption is that applications
are the baseline and it is a pattern that naturally works on a phone
(which it arguably has), it seems possible that the idea of the app
store could become widespread. A person would have their iPad as their
computer and their iPhone as their laptop with both synced via the cloud
and apps. I don't know that it will work like that but it could.

The point is that in either case, mobile computing is only getting more
important. One interesting side effect is that mobile platforms are only
now considering how to handle multiprocessing. This is not even how to
mimic threading, but rather how to do two things at once. It is getting
solved quickly, but it is interesting because developers have been
focused on how to handle the problem of writing apps for more than one
processor. It appears it doesn't matter because while desktops and
laptops are getting more cores, people might just stop using them in
favor of a different kind of machine. It still means the web and servers
are still very important, but we can probably keep punting needing
things like functional paradigms in order to handle the multiple
processors all our users supposedly will be utilizing in the future.



.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: programming
.. comments::
