=====================
 Advertising Culture
=====================

Before the Super Bowl, we went to the store. Honestly, this was not the
best plan as it was a mad house. As I stood in the extremely long
checkout line, I had moment really look around at my surroundings. I
noticed a game machine where you pick up a stuffed animal. The sign on
it was pretty terrible. It looked liked someone threw it together in
Print Shop. While I'm sure there is some interesting tech in gaming
machines, I couldn't help but wonder why something so generic and tacky
still manages to get people to spend money on it.

This got me looking around at other logos and advertisements and
realized how most were less than appealing. It was clear that the "good
enough" for advertising was pretty horrible. It also was clear that they
were somewhat successful. I'm sure there plenty of brands that I glanced
at that will never be seen again, but there were plenty that relatively
successful. The whole experience made me think, that as a culture, we've
become so accustomed to seeing ads that even though their message is
displayed with a huge lack of quality, we don't really care.

The fact that a dumb game machine that has to compete with guarantees
can even be around when it looks so shady. If I had learned the hook
couldn't possibly pick up 99% of the items, it wouldn't surprise me.

Yet, even though the machines screams ripoff, it is still there and
making money. The reason we are a culture of ads is because we spend our
money on the products.

There is nothing wrong with spending money on something like a silly
game picking up a stuffed animal. But, there is something wrong with a
culture almost addicted to its own convincing. It might be that we feel
desired when we see advertisements. That someone wants something of us.
We feel needed. Personally, I don't feel that way, but who knows what
goes on in someones subconscious.

The Super Bowl and its tradition of "good" ads only supports the
addiction. The people who say they watch the game for the commercials I
think are lying. I watched the commercials and for every interesting
gag, there were more regular commercials just showing produce and toilet
paper.

My observation isn't anything new, but for me personally, it was
something I hadn't personally realized. It honestly angered me to some
degree that we've let ourselves become such consumers. Our senses are no
longer focused on keeping out of danger or finding food, but instead
they are interfaces for companies to give their pitch. Fortunately, we
all have the choice whether or not to buy. And what's more, the
important aspect of that choice is that it's something you as a single
person do. No one chooses for you. The best way to combat the ad
addiction is to simply exercise that choice and choose not to listen.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: Uncategorized
.. comments::
