Replacing Monitors
==================

I just read a quick article on `Microsoft's new VR goggles
<http://www.wired.com/2015/01/microsoft-hands-on/>`_. The idea of
layering virtual interfaces on top of the real world seems really cool
and even practical in some use cases. What seems really difficult is
how an application will understand the infinite number visual
environments in order to effectively and accurately visualize the
interfaces. Hopefully the SDK for the device includes a library that
provides for different real world elements like `placeOnTop(vObject,
x, y z)` where it can recognize some object in the room and allows
that object to be made available as a platform. In other words, it
sees the coffee table and makes it available as an object that you can
put something on top of.

The thing is, what I'd love to see is VR replacing monitors! Every
year TVs and monitors get upgrades in size and quality, yet the prices
rarely drop very radically. Right now I have a laptop and an external
monitor that I use at home. I'd love to get rid of both tiny screens
and just look into space and see my windows on a huge, virtual, flat
surface.

An actual computer would still be required and there wouldn't
necessarily need to be huge changes to the OS at first. The goggles
would just be another big screen that would take the rasterized screen
and convert it to something seen in the analog world. Sure, this would
probably ruin a few eyes at first, but having a huge monitor measured
in feet vs. inches is extremely enticing.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: vr
.. comments::
