Coding Pride
############

Are you proud of the code you write? What is it about some code are you
specifically proud of? For me, I've become less and less proud of my
code.

This doesn't seem like a bad thing. It helps me to be humble and less
attached. Lacking pride doesn't imply that I don't care about the code,
but simply that when I'm done, it doesn't feel like something I'm
excited about showing people.

I can say it does concern me slightly. My perspectives seem to have
changed slightly looking at code that I respect. It is typically pretty
boring and nothing too interesting really happens. The meat of the code
ends up being comments that describe rather clearly what should be going
on. None of this is a bad thing, but I'm also finding myself less
interested in new language features or using a feature that that is not
well supported. In short, my code has become rather conservative.

Some would argue that this is a good thing and generally, and it should
be obvious, I agree. With that said, it also seems to be indicative of a
more fundamental issue of questionning my skills. Is the reason I don't
use some experimental feature because I don't trust it will continue to
be developed or is it really that the feature isn't very easy for me to
use? That slick new language feature that everyone is talking about
looks helpful, but I'm not sure I really understand what the big deal
about it is. Maybe I'm missing something.

It is important that I recognize when my code is wrong or none optimal,
but it also is important that I feel I can code confidently. My lack of
pride in my code actually feels more like a lack of confidence. As is
with most of life, the solution is plain old hard work.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: programming, python
.. comments::
