===================
 Selling Magazines
===================

It is rare that I answer my door anymore at the house. The vast majority
of the time it is nothing I want to deal with. One time I had my
neighbor come to my door and it ended in a rather nice conversation for
a bit. That is probably the last time I can remember where I was really
glad someone unexpected came to my door. Most the time they selling
something, with magazines being the most prevalent product. Some other
popular products people have tried to sell are arts and crafts, monthly
meat subscriptions and lawn services. Yet, of all the things folks try
to sell, magazines seems to be the most popular. Needless to say, I've
never bought any.

The whole concept of selling magazines door to door just doesn't make
sense. First off, I have the internet. I can get whatever news and
information I need. Magazines quickly become clutter, something I just
don't need. In addition, I get the opportunity to publish my own
thoughts and opinions as well as become part of a community. Secondly,
why would I give a random person off the street a personal check, cash
or credit card number for anything? What is the difference between some
kid off the street trying to "succeed" selling me a subscription to Time
and some bit of spam telling me to buy some pills? I didn't ask for
either and therefore I don't really feel confident sharing personal
information with these parties. This goes the same for sales calls.

It is nothing personal. Honestly, the kid that just came to my door
this afternoon seemed like a nice enough guy. He was working the streets
in a shirt and tie in the rain. His hand was freaking freezing when I
shook it. Part of me felt sorry for him, but at the same time, I was not
about risk giving out my banking information or credit card just because
this person felt selling magazines was a worthwhile endeavor. While I
doubt he was planning on swindling me or stealing my identity, there is
no way I'm going to take that risk with my family just so this guys can
get a cheap cruise or get the opportunity to sell selling subscriptions
to other kids.

Some might say I'm just being paranoid and I'll admit that the chances
of me getting burned are pretty slim. But, in addition to avoiding an
unnecessary risk, I'm not really a fan of selling door to door as a good
career for a kid. When I was in high school and looking for work, there
were a few times where I found out the job was actually a sales
position. One was selling knives and I quickly said no. It required me
forking out $300 to get my demo kit and that was not going to happen.
Another time, I went door to door selling coupon cards. A company would
offer a card for $20-$30 that had discounts and free services. If you
actually used it, it wasn't a terrible deal. They would pick up everyone
at a Perkins and drive us out to some neighborhood where we would roam
the streets knocking on doors. I'm not a very good sales person, so it
was easy to see how as a source of income it just didn't scale. The
people who were relatively successful were not exactly breaking the bank
either. A friend of mine, who turned out to be an excellent sales
person, got stiffed on some checks.

The point is not so much that selling door to door is bad as much as it
just isn't a good career. As a society, culture or community, there come
times when transitions happen. It can be difficult, but usually it means
a better deal for the majority. In my mind, selling door to door
magazines falls into that category. There will always be people who buy
into the prepackaged sales businesses, but at some point I hope they
stop being folks knocking on my door in the rain trying to sell me paper
magazines. In other words, look at Snuggie's, ShamWow and even spammers
for better models selling relatively useless goods. Then I don't have to
be frustrated when I go to the door knowing I'll be saying no to buying
an outdated medium.



.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: Uncategorized
.. comments::
