Silly Lawsuits
##############

I just skimmed `an article`_ arguing the Apple vs. Samsung case doesn't
really matter. It is a trend I've noticed on `Slashdot`_ as of late
where articles increasingly touch on things like patents and lawsuits
rather than actual technology.

These copy and patent cases have little actual meaning, yet they are
really dangerous. These companies are using the courts and patents to
hurt competitors. It is nothing more than an expensive tactic that we
pay for as a society. We should be angry that companies are using our
courts as tools in their quest to gain marketshare and fight
competitors. If that was the intent by providing things like patents,
then we need to completely rethink the way we protect the ideas of
others.

The root of the issue comes down to the ability to compete. A patent can
be a valuable asset when you are talking about an inventor trying to
build a business. The inventor can use the patent as a means of
protecting the idea against those that can immediately copy and bring a
product to market. When we are talking about companies like Apple and
Samsung, both have no problems whatsoever taking an idea from patent to
product reasonbly quickly. Do they really need patent protection when
they have the means to beat competitors fairly? Should we allow these
companies to sue simply because the cases look the same?

The situation is similar to privacy for celebrities. The courts have
ruled that when a person is considered a celebrity, you can use images
taken in public without that person's consent. I'm not entirely sure of
the logic of the court, but it makes some sense in my mind. Famous
people could create an entire industry based on suing news corporations
for unsanctioned photos. Similarly, if a celebrity doesn't want a photo
to be taken, they have the means to prevent it from happening. Most of
these patent lawsuits are not about protecting ideas. They are celebrity
companies using the patent system as business strategy.

.. _an article: http://blogs.hbr.org/cs/2012/08/who_cares_if_samsung_copied_ap.html
.. _Slashdot: http://slashdot.org


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: programming
.. comments::
