End the Fed
###########

*NOTE: For anyone who reads my blog, this is the first political post
I've ever written. Politics is not a theme I'd like to add to my
published persona as it is rare that casual politics does anything but
start arguments. For this reason, I hope that anyone reading this does
so with an open mind and understands my goal is to reflect my own
discoveries and hopefully, others find motivation to look deeper on
their own. In other words if you want to call people names or be
divisive, then you've already missed the point. Thanks for reading!*

I just finished `End the Fed`_ by `Ron Paul`_. Now I know some people
think Ron Paul is a total kook. I had my doubts when I first started
looking into his message, but over and over again, I found myself
feeling his statements as logical, practical and realistic. One thing
that has been a theme in his campaign and his fans is the desire to end
the Federal Reserve. Not really understanding this aspect of his
campaign, I decided to read his book.

It is funny because when I first learned about the fed in school, it
didn't make sense why they said it "created" money by adjusting interest
rates. In my mind, it didn't truly "create" anything except when it
printed money. Ron Paul argues that very truth. No matter what the
theory says, you can't create something from nothing and the perceived
benefits of more money in the economy is really just semantic.
The most interesting perspective regarding the Fed is the moral
argument. People have strong opinions regarding funding of government
programs, yet they don't mind that the fed makes their wages worth less
and less each year. Ron Paul argues this is immoral and acts as a evil
against society. Honestly, I believe him. If you raise a wage to keep up
with the rise of inflation, you are really just paying someone the same
thing. There are many people that never get these yearly raises as wage
earners and the result is that every time the Fed "creates" more money,
their wage is reduced.

If you think Ron Paul is crazy, I'd challenge to read End the Fed. I
can't say it is the most concise book I've read or fully explains the
economic beliefs of Ron Paul, but it does reflect the principles he
believes would help remove a vast amount of corruption in the
government. Even though he may not be a perfect candidate, his
perspective on war, freedom and the role of government are worth
investigating as his message avoids party affiliation in favor of acting
on principles. They say money is the root of all evil, which means
ending the Fed is in fact helping to remove evil from our government.

.. _End the Fed: http://www.amazon.com/End-Fed-Ron-Paul/dp/0446549193
.. _Ron Paul: http://ronpaul2012.com


.. author:: default
.. categories:: general
.. tags:: general
.. comments::
