Privacy is Important
####################

I just read this `short blog`_ on `Angry Birds`_ reading contact
information from your phone. Now, I bet most people don't really care
and honestly I don't blame them. Who cares if Rovio gets some email
addresses from your address book? That is what spam filters are for
anyway. Besides, you can easily unsubscribe from any spam and, thanks to
the CAN SPAM act, sue those who disregard your desire not to be
bothered. What really bothers me is that my phone is not my computer.
Let me explain. A computer has an operating system that works atop a
file system. You can install different operating systems or applications
and you can use different filesystems in some cases. You can create
folders and organize your files however you want. More than one person
typically can use a computer thanks to the features of the operating
system. Your computer is something that you can control at a very low
level. This is very different from your phone.
A cell phone is on a provider's network, which brings with it certain
restrictions. They have limited physical resources and as such they want
to control what can use those resources. Phones also have to adhere to
standards set by the government for things like the spectrum at which
they communicate and how powerful or limited the antennae function.
Generally, you can't easily change the operating system the phone uses
and installing applications is done through an intermediary (the iTunes
App Store, Google App Store, etc.).  Most importantly though, phones are
used by only one person.
The larger distinction here is that a phone is personal by default, yet
it is the least personalized. If an application is run on your phone,
there is a good chance it has access to everything on that phone,
contacts, text messages, call history, minutes used, billing info,
location information, other applications, etc. It is trivial to access
this kind of information because the platform is completely controlled.
There is probably documentation that explicitly shares how to access all
this information. Since a phone is personal, the relevance to some
company is that the information found on the phone can be directly
applied to a specific person.
This is honestly a little scary. It is not scary in that I have things
to "hide" but it is scary because there are things that I don't feel
comfortable sharing. If a person comes to your home you welcome them
into your living room. They may use your bathroom and you offer them a
drink or snak from kitchen. You don't give them a key to your filing
cabinet or your medicine cabinet. These areas of your life are private
for a variety of reasons. It is impolite to ask someone how much do you
make, so in theory, we should be offended these apps take our personal
information on our phones without even asking. It is rude to do as a
guest (on your phone) and it is scary because they tell others for
money.
As a programmer, the reasons apps don't ask if it is OK is because it
is inconvenient. I don't believe Rovio is out to do anything more than
make money selling games. If they can collect information in the mean
time that other people want to use, then why not. User typically don't
want hurdles. Being asked every time your start up Angry Birds whether
you mind if they use your location and contacts would be annoying and
turn people off to the game. Since they want to make money, they just
don't ask. That doesn't make it right and it's rather offensive, but
most would probably do the same thing in their shoes. You have a captive
audience, a sample,  you can gather specific, accurate information from
at almost any time in order to learn something new to help sell other
products.
The tough part is that it is convenient for users. Google prides itself
on the usefulness of their search results. They take all that anonymous
information and use it to help understand what people really want. It is
also convenient because instead of teaching your computer explicitly to
do things, our machines simply watch what we do and learn our patterns
in order to help us. As scary as that sounds, it is realistically very
powerful. Computers really are not very smart. Despite what the movies
would have you believe, computers need a lot of instructions and people
rarely want to provide all that instruction. If you provide a value for
all the variables your computer needs, it would be a total waste of your
time. Again, if you were asked if your information could be used every
time you opened Angry Birds, would still play it?
I'm not saying that we shouldn't use Google or play Angry Birds. We
simply need to be more understanding of what we really have in our
pockets. Our phones are much closer to our wallet and private life than
our computers are. A computer can do anything, but a phone is personal.
The convenience the applications provide is helpful to a point, but we
as users need to find a way to force our desire for privacy. Taking the
time to see what options are available for applications is a good first
step to understanding what an application might be doing behind the
scenes to give you a better experience. Avoiding advertisements is
another way to take away the value of secret data gathering. If the
emails don't work, they are not going to keep sending them. People fear
the world of Big Brother and 1984, but the reality is society is not
ruled by an all seeing police force. Instead, we are becoming slaves to
our own desires and wants such that we can be controlled simply by
focusing our desires on what someone is selling. In this way it is
comforting to know that defeating this kind of control is a simple as
ignoring the ads and support those who support your privacy.

.. _short blog: http://threatpost.com/en_us/blogs/forget-epsilon-fear-angry-bird-042611
.. _Angry Birds: http://www.rovio.com/index.php?page=angry-birds


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: programming
.. comments::
