View Source
===========

I watched a bit of `this fireside chat with Steve Jobs
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6iACK-LNnzM>`_. It was pretty
interesting to hear Steve discuss the availability of the network and
how it changes the way we can work. Specifically, he mentioned that
because of NFS (presumably in the BSD family of unices), he could
share his home directory on every computer he works on without ever
having to think about back ups or syncing his work.

What occurred to me was how much of the software we use is taken for
granted. Back in the day and educational license for Unix was around
$1800! I can only imagine the difficulties becoming a software
developer back then when all the interesting tools like databases or
servers were prohibitively expensive!

It reminds me of when I first started learning about HTML and web
development. I could always view the source to see what was
happening. It became an essential part of how I saw the web and
programming in general. The value of software was not only in its
function, but in its transparency. The ability to read the source and
support myself as a user allowed me the opportunity to understand why
the software was so valuable.

When I think about how difficult it must have been to become a hacker
back in the early days of personal computing, it is no wonder that
free software and open source became so prevalent. These early
pioneers had to learn the systems without reading the source! Learning
meant reading through incomplete, poorly written manuals. When the
manual was wrong or out of date, I can only imagine the hair pulling
that must have occurred. The natural solution to this problem was to
make the source available.

The process of programming is still very new and *very* detailed,
while still being extremely generic. We are fortunate as programmers
that the computing landscape was not able to enclose software
development within proprietary walls like so many other technical
fields. I'm very thankful I can view the source!


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: python, html, javascript, open source
.. comments::
