====================
 Band Relationships
====================

`We`_ just got back from playing Denver for `The UMS`_. Our first show
was pretty crappy and honestly we didn't play very well. It ended up
being OK as people showed up, but for whatever reasons, the stage
manager and people running it were non-existent. Not a huge deal, but it
made for a rough start after a long trip from Oklahoma and getting in a
small fender bender in our hotel parking lot. The second show was much
better. Tons of people came out, it was in an actual club (the first was
in a stage built into a truck) and we sold a bunch of merch. All in all,
not a bad trip.

We also spent the weekend with our manager and generally tried to hash
out our plans. After being in the studio for a time we have some songs
recorded but the mix is pretty terrible, which is frustrating. The short
and skinny is that the folks working on the record could have done a
better job. Our expectations might very well have been higher this time
around, but at the same time, we still expected more engagement and
effort in terms of doing things right. It felt like an up hill battle,
which is unfortunate, since we did spend a lot of time and worked really
hard. The result though is that we'll need to get our tracks to get
remixed.

This brings me to the actual title of this blog. Our friend `Dave`_
constantly tells us to just ask our fans for money and use tools like
`Kickstarter`_ to raise funds for things like recording. I always agreed
with him that it would work for some bands, but for whatever reason I
didn't think it would work for us. Lately, I think I've realized why. It
all comes down the relationship bands have with their fans.

In my mind, I see our music a certain way. It is probably an ideal
vision of super cool people pushing the boundaries of tone and ripping
faces off live. The reality is though, I think we're actually more of a
rock band. The concepts of cool that I always try to instantiate in my
visions are probably not really there. This isn't to say we are "cool",
but rather we're not the leather jacket, cigarette smoking, sun glasses
wearing, modern Velvet Underground. Live we try to put on a show and
there is intensity, but the more I think about who we are and what we
really sound like, it feels like I've misunderstood something.

This disconnect between my vision of our music, our aesthetic reality,
is what has always dissuaded me from wanting to ask fans for money and
be more communicative. In my vision, we're an enigma and a mystery. The
reality everyone says we're really nice people. We shred on stage and
off stage you can come up to us and we'll smile and talk to you. In
short, asking for money from fans and providing a more open relationship
with them seems totally natural in reality.

The reason this has begun to feel natural is because fans understand
music is entertainment. I don't believe anyone thinks we are simply
acting on stage, but rather they realize that in addition to getting on
stage and playing music, we also drive around in our van, eat cheap food
and generally struggle like anyone else. The 40 minutes on stage is the
show and the rest is real life. Up until this point, I don't think we've
connected with our fans in real life and the result is that we haven't
made clear our needs, and more importantly, given them a chance to help.
Moving forward, I'm not sure what will change today, but something
definitely should. There are some obvious things we can do to shed a
little light on what our day to day looks like. There will always be
some mystery, but we don't really have much to hide. One thing that has
become exceptionally clear is that we can't try to be something we're
not and now that I think I have a more realistic view of what we really
are, avoiding the things we're not should be much easier.


.. _We: http://umemusic.com
.. _The UMS: http://www.theums.com/
.. _Dave: http://pampelmoose.com
.. _Kickstarter: http://kickstarter.com


.. author:: default
.. categories:: music
.. tags:: music
.. comments::
