===========================================
 More Getting Past Programmer's Block
===========================================

Walking into a large code base is a real challenge. I've talked about
`reading code`_ before, but it seems that no matter what happens you can
never become a primary source. There have been plenty of times when
debugging a problem you come across code that doesn't make sense and an
effort is made to determine what the original author might have been
thinking. This isn't analyzing the person's state of mind or anything
deep, but it is simply trying to understand what the programmer was
worried about.

I frame this as "worry" because that is what I do. When I'm writing
code, there are usually situations or cases that I'm protecting myself
against. Honestly, these are probably premature optimizations, but at
the same time, why introduce a bug that is easy to fix. In my mind this
seems pretty reasonable, but in looking back at what others have done,
my conclusion is it is a terrible idea. Code is there to tell the
computer what to do and not what some requirement was at the time or the
intent of the programmer. In school we learn to write criticisms dealing
only with the subject of critique, yet as programmers, we often inject
small snippets of code that really require some background to make any
sense at all.

Lately, when I hit snags in my understanding of the code, my recourse
has been to step away and try writing something about it. This may be a
waste of time, but it does help battle the morale beating nature of
reading code. There is nothing worse than having a large piece of code
in your editor and constantly putting print statements all over the
place only to keep missing the one detail that is important. You feel as
though you're incompetant and in adequant and indeserving of the title
"programmer". So, when this happens, it only makes sense to try a little
deconstruction of the issues you're facing and write about it in hopes
someone else might find help or you can talk through the problem.

The `technique`_ is not new, but it is still difficult to master. When
I worked in an office, there were many times where I'd close the door to
really focus. That privacy often led me to start talking to myself,
which in turn ended up being an effective means of working through a
problem. When I was young, we took a test that help reveal what kind of
learner you were. I ended up auditory, which makes a good deal of sense
as I'm also a musician. The obvious downside of simply writing about
problems is that I don't get the auditory aspects of the process. That
said, I think it is still useful as it means there is still a
requirement to improve my communication skills, something that is always
useful.

Someday, I really hope that my understanding of the code base is like
that of a primary source. It is really nice to have the confidence and
understanding of the problem and implementation when maintaining code.
If you are the one writing code for the first time, please consider this
second source maintainer. This is kind of a "duh" idea to most
programmers, yet in practice, I'd argue that most developers miss their
non-x86 audience.

.. _reading code: http://ionrock.org/blog/2009/12/08/The_Debugging_Wall
.. _technique: http://headrush.typepad.com/creating_passionate_users/2005/01/rubberducking_a.html


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: programming
.. comments::
