OFF!
####

Tonight I finally got to see `OFF!`_ and it was awesome. When I was a
kid seeing punk bands I had a complete lack of appreciation for lyrics.

Don't ask me why, but as long as it had a fast back beat and distorted
guitars, I was pretty happy. Fortunately, my tastes have changed and
lyrics definitely means something when listening to a band. Lyrics are
still not the most important thing to me, but when they are great it
makes the song amazing.

This is what OFF! did so well. Keith Morris is amazing. Period.

A lot of people don't understand punk. It isn't about anger or violence
or negativity. Punk is self expression. Keith Morris understands this
and is a great advocate. His lyrics are simple and understandable amidst
the squall and rumble of the music. They connect with people directly
without an ounce of cliche or reminiscence. He makes hardcore punk feel
new.

The music has the same effect. The drums are intense with a background
of elegance. You can completely ignore them beating away and for that
split second when you end up hearing them, you're floored. The guitar
sounds thick and huge even though the effect is thin and scrappy. The
bass breaks up and growls. It sounds odd outside the songs, but during
it is a critical part of the wall of aggressive sound. I love it.

I missed many opportunities to see OFF! It was redeeming the show blew
my mind and made the wait worth it. If you have a chance, go watch. It
is not nostalgia yet it speaks to a time when the mainstream was a
different world than the underground. You can feel like your a part of
something and find a sense of community. You see musicians that are
passionate and skilled, making loud, aggressive music that is
infectious. I can only hope that one day people can say the same of the
music I've made.

.. _OFF!: http://offofficial.com/


.. author:: default
.. categories:: music
.. tags:: music
.. comments::
