Indie Music is For Friends
##########################

I made an observation today. A rather large indie blog claimed how much
they enjoy the new Girls record. From what I heard, I like it too. What
struck me though, was that their first record was kind of terrible. The
songs were OK, but they weren't very different or added anything new.

This is just my opinion of course. I had planned on seeing them and then
I saw live videos and promptly realized I would not be spending money to
see them. Again, just my opinion.

Going back to my observation, I think that a lot of indie music is
really about seeing your friends succeed. What I mean is that even
though the first Girls record and their live performances were not very
good, the indie community saw something in the band and worked to make
them succeed. The result is a new record that seems really great and
they don't suck live anymore. I can't say the music is that different or
provides something new, but at the same time, it is really accessible.

When I was younger and getting in punk and independent music, the bands
had a vision to do what they wanted to do. It had nothing to do with
getting big or signing your life away. It was, idealistically at least,
about making the music that came naturally. A great example is Nirvana.

When you watch *Live! Tonight! Sold Out!!* you can see immediately that
their goal was not to put on a perfect show or perform their record. The
goal was to do what they do and that was to play loud, have fun and do
it for themselves.

I don't get that perspective from indie music today. I get the
impression that bands start hearing they could be someone big and start
thinking in terms of how to get there. The indie music blogs also get a
kick about being someone that discovers a band that breaks out vs. being
someone who exposes people to new music. Gorilla vs. Bear is a good
example of this kind of blogging as they have a distinct style they like
and push, which means most bands end up sounding similar. This is fine
when you want to find another chillwave artist, but when you are sick of
dreamy music and want something electronic or heavy, you have to find
someone else to help you out.

I'm not saying this is a negative. When I was first discovering punk
music, it was very difficult to find bands similar to what I like. I
listened to the Minor Threat discography over and over, partially
because I loved it, but it was also because it wasn't trivial to find
bands that had similar characteristics. If I had a Gorilla vs. Bear of
80s hard core and punk as a kid, life would have been grand.

At least for a little while.

The more I listened to punk music the more punk expanded. I had bought
Sonic Youth as a kid, shunned it as alternative, then rediscovered and
realized it as punk. Nirvana was the same story. I found hard core and
stoner rock and noise, all of which helped shape my perspective of punk
and independent music. When we toured with the Meat Puppets it sealed
the deal in terms of recognizing punk is not about the sounds, but where
those sounds come from.

To be clear, I'm not saying that indie music today is insincere or too
polished or really anything else that might allude to it lacking
integrity. I am saying that the focus has changed. The gates are open
and people see that success is a step through the door. It has become
really easy to write songs without thinking some part sounds too "radio"
or "main stream" because no one will say a band sold out. While it is
really great that fans and press still support bands who do take steps
to support themselves, it makes me wonder if that also lowered the
standard bands have when writing. There is not a requirement to do
something innovative or take risks. Taking risks might also be more
difficult since the field of music has been saturated with artists for
quite some time.

No matter the motives of artists, what really matters are that people
are moved by music. Fortunately, music traditionally is not appreciated
in a vacuum. Music helps to mark moments in time in a person's life,
which means that any song can be great to someone. My goal as a musician
is to write the music we feel. We practice and work hard as a band to
make great music and we want people to hear it, and most importantly, be
moved by it.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: music
.. tags:: music
.. comments::
