Getting Paid
============

`Cory wrote up some thoughts on funding OSS
<https://lukasa.co.uk/2015/08/Funding_OSS/>`_ that was inspired by the
recent decision to `stop feature development on hypothesis
<http://www.drmaciver.com/2015/08/throwing-in-the-towel/>`_. There is
a problem in the FOSS community where developers get frustrated that
the time they invest has a very low return. While I understand this
feeling, it is also worthwhile to consider some benefits to investing
in open source software that makes it worth your time.

I think most FOSS developers would agree the benefit of working on
FOSS is recognition. It feels good to know others are using your
software. Beyond simply being recognized, FOSS also are often given
respect from other programmers and technical community at large. It is
this respect that can be used to

-----

So, what do you get, right now, from working on (successful) Open
Source software?

While many developers would like to get money, the reality is you get
something less tangible, a reputation as a good developer. You can use
your reputation as an open source leader to negotiate for the things
you want. Often you can work from home, negotiate for more vacation
time, better pay and time to work on your project, all thanks to your
reputation. Not to mention, you often can choose to work for well
respected organizations doing work you find reasonably interesting.

Companies **should** support FOSS developers for the code they have
graciously offered for free. At the same time, we as developers should
realize that it is our responsibility to capitalize on our
contributions, even when they may not be directly justifiable to a
business. If a company hired a well known Emacs (or Vim!) developer,
even though the company may uses Python, the company may still be able
to offer time to work on the FOSS code, more money and/or sponsoring
going to conferences. These types of expenses are easy to account for
on a balance sheet when compared to giving someone money for
non-specific work on a project.

Hopefully, in the future new methods of directly supporting FOSS
developers come to light, but in the meantime, lets see what we can do
today. Ask your manager about having X number of hours to work on your
open source project. Request sponsorship to a conference. If they
refuse, look for another job and include your project work as part of
the package. A new opportunity is a great means of letting your
employer know your skills are valuable and your terms for staying
include working on your FOSS work.

For companies, support developers to work on FOSS! Even if someone
doesn't work on something directly associated with your current code
base or business, that person has proven themselves as a good
developer, with the real world experience being available in the
open. Similarly, if your organization is strugging to keep or acquire
good talent, offering someone 4-8 hours a week to work on a
project they already contribute to is a relatively cheap benefit in
order to hire someone that is a proven successful developer. What's
more, that person is likely to have a network of other great devs that
you can dip into.

Again, I understand why developers are frustrated that they spend time
on FOSS with seemingly very little to gain. But, rather than sit by
and wait for someone to offer to pay you money for your time,
communicate your frustrations to your employer and try to use some of
your reputation to get what you want. If your current employer refuses
to listen, it is probably time to consider other options. Companies
that having difficulties attracting or keping talent should offer FOSS
support as part of the benefits package.

Finally, for some developers, it is a good idea to take a step back
and consider why you write software. As a musician, it is clich√© to
say I don't do it for the money. The reason being is that the music
industry is notorious for not paying anything with a long line of
willing musicians to work for nothing. While we as software developers
do make a good living writing software, there is something to be said
for enjoying our independent time writing code. Taking a hobby you
enjoy and turning into a business often removes much of what makes
that hobby fun. It no longer is yours to do with as you want. If you
write FOSS code for fun, then you are under no obligations, other than
your own desires. Programming is fun, so regardless of whether 1 or 1
million people use your code, recognize why you started writing the
code in the first place.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: python, open source
.. comments::
