==========================
 I Saw The Social Network
==========================

Last night Lauren and I took a break from working and music to catch
`The Social Network`_. For those that don't know, the movie is the story
of Mark Zuckerberg and how `Facebook`_ got started. Going into the
movie, I wasn't really thinking I'd like it. I'm not really a fan of
Facebook or Mark Zuckerberg. In the grand scheme of things, Facebook
doesn't feel like Google or Microsoft or Apple. On a technical level, it
doesn't seem as though it is really improving the world via technology
as much as it is an addictive website that allows people a place for
their online identities. Me, I have a `real`_ website, so social
networks fail to provide a place to call home. That is simply my own
perspective.

Even though my attitude could have been better, it wasn't too bad a
movie. In the previews I saw, the image of "rockstar" programmer was
laid on pretty thick, complete with the wild nights, drugs, alcohol and
promiscuous women. Fortunately, this wasn't nearly as prevalent as I
expected. There was definitely a bit of a college lifestyle represented
but it was somewhat believable. The one standout situation that was
truly ridiculous was the drunken hacker internship where college
students were forced to take shots while trying to break into a "python"
web server. It might have happened, but that one seemed really far
fetched. Again, my attitude was somewhat lacking in that I don't see
Facebook as some powerhouse of technical innovation. It is a completely
irrational opinion, but being honest, it still exists. While they tried
to make Zuckerberg into something of a genius, at best, he came off as
being relatively bright with a bent on ambition and capitalizing on
opportunities. Overall, it was a pretty decent movie and I most
importantly, I had a good time, so that is that.

Our drummer thought I would have really like it though because it seems
like a "geek" movie. The fact is Facebook just isn't very interesting
from a "geek" perspective. There are those that are interested in its
social graph, but that just doesn't seem that interesting because it
still is in the walled garden of Facebook. In my mind Facebook and the
social aspects that have been seen as revolutionary never seem that
poignant. Social networks have continued to be very similar in that they
consistently give people a place online to point others at that they can
easily publish to and gather an audience. All the photos, videos, witty
comments, etc. all are just people publishing. Some have purpose while
others don't. I'm not saying this is a bad thing or suggesting it is
negative. Lauren always says I'm extremely active on Facebook when I
probably visit it once a month, if that. The fact is I use facebook to
publish just like anyone else. But when the next "social" publishing
platform comes around, I'll do the same thing and update it with
whatever it is I'm trying to publish. And that is the point, something
else will come along.

I'm really not trying to be a downer here. I know tons of people love
Facebook and just can't enough of the communication that goes on there.
My "geek" perspective is that I'm just not that impressed or excited
about it. Personal publishing online has been something I've done for a
long time, so the opportunity that Facebook offers just isn't that
compelling. That doesn't mean Facebook isn't a powerful medium for
others to publish online. In fact, I'd argue that what does make
Facebook compelling is that it raises the expectations of what
non-programmer citizens of the web expect. It is good that people have
talked about privacy and the problems of using many social networks. It
is because at some point, I'd hope people will want to have not just an
account, but a real domain they truly own. Facebook is just one step
towards that, just like Blogger, Wordpress, MySpace, Posterous, Twitter,
etc....


.. _The Social Network: http://www.thesocialnetwork-movie.com/
.. _Facebook: http://facebook.com
.. _real: http://ionrock.org


.. author:: default
.. categories:: code
.. tags:: programming
.. comments::
