Stop SOPA
#########

As a musician that cares about fans, copyright law and lawsuits like
`this one`_ between Universal and `GrooveShark`_ are both frustrating
and encouraging. I can't stand that people have to pay a massive amount
of money for pirating music. A song costs a buck, so if I stole 1000
songs, I should owe $1000. I'd even go so far as to say that the person
enforcing the copyright could get a court order to find out who I had
shared the songs with in order to enact the same penalty. This kind of
enforcement, while still kind of dumb, has some semblance of logic and
sanity. If someone steals your car, the insurance company doesn't give
you 150000% its value to buy a new one. You are lucky to get what it is
worth and you don't lose the hassle of dealing with the entire
situation. Stealing sucks and people shouldn't do it, but it also sucks
to provide a benefit to those who were stolen from. That suggests that
the victim should be a profitable position, which is simply not natural.

Even though is frustrates me to know end people are getting royally
screwed for downloading music, it is a good thing to know that songs we
write can be protected. I'm not asking the RIAA to sue kids out of
existence for downloading music illegally. But, it is beneficial to know
that I do have rights for content that I create. When someone tries to
use my music for something I don't believe, I can say no. When someone
else is trying to sell my songs, I can say no and sue them or go to the
authorities. These are good things because while I'm personally fine
with kids getting my music online for free, I'm not OK with my music
showing up in pornography or sold by someone who isn't going to pay me
for the use. Having a copyright helps me to control my work and create a
career.

The nice thing about copyright currently is that it is primarily a
system based on owner enforcement. It is the copyright holder's
responsibility to enforce their rights, otherwise a violation might be
considered authorized if the copyright holder knew and did nothing about
it. Again, this is a good thing. If someone downloads my music on
bittorrent (and I've seen our new record on plenty of torrent sites),
I'm OK with it.

What does all this have to do with `SOPA`_? SOPA aims to make it easier
to sue and penalize those who infringe on copyrights by allowing rights
holders do things like shut down payments to the site and make search
engines stop displaying the site. Streaming copyrighted content also
becomes a felony. The result of this sort of action is that copyright
ceases to be a tool for artists to retain their rights and instead
includes the government in the process of stopping piracy. The result is
that major labels will most likely try to sue most web services out of
existence for losses that were never truly incurred. Not to mention that
it censors the web by allowing copyright holders a mechanism for abuse.
Imagine a label that cuts off some deal with Google and then sues them
for copyright infringement. In theory, they could potentially have
Google search results removed from Google!

The fact is we need the government to stay out of copyright. If you
write or create anything, you now own something. It is your prerogative
to share it and make it available or keep it private. By involving the
government more and more in copyright, you invite them to your creative
table, to your privacy and your property. They don't belong here.

If you a musician you should recognize that copyright is not why you
make a living. You can make a living as an artist by providing great
content. That content is defined as create (in terms of a career) by how
well it motivates people to pay for it. It doesn't matter if they steal
the song if they come to the show and buy the record, a poster and a
t-shirt. Instead of worrying your music is being spread across the world
without you getting paid, it might be a better exercise to consider why
people don't feel compelled to pay you.

.. _this one: http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203710704577052691637532470.html
.. _GrooveShark: http://grooveshark.com
.. _SOPA: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stop_Online_Piracy_Act


.. author:: default
.. categories:: music
.. tags:: music
.. comments::
