Great Music Requires Hard Work
##############################

The thing that has been sticking out to me with our shows with Helmet
and The Toadies and our show with Jane's Addiction is how much work goes
into playing music. With each new level of success, there is also a new
level of performance you strive for. There are different reasons this
happens.

Live music can be a profitable endeavor, but there are limits to what
you can charge. If your fan base is not really growing and you want to
make more money, your only choice are higher ticket prices. If you want
to charge more you're going to have to justify those costs to your fans,
which in turn means upping the ante at your shows. This could be with
lights, more musicians/sounds, etc. Likewise, you could try for a more
intimate setting or trying some sort of theme. In any case, you can't
just go up and do the same thing you've always done and expect fans to
pay more money.

If you fan base is growing then you can stick to what you're doing a bit
longer as it is obviously working. You may not need to inject a new
light show into the mix or add extra props. That said, you also will be
expected to play longer. You can't typically headline a 1500 cap room
with a 30 minute set. This usually is going to mean more gear and
dealing with the logistics of having to play a 75 minute set. There is
more merch to sell and settle with at the end of the night and more gear
to move in and out. Sound checks are earlier and tours are closer to a
month, rather than 2 weeks. A bus seems like a luxury, but the reality
is that you can't make a 3pm sound check with a 9 hour drive without
driving all night.

All of these things are practical reasons bands have to raise the amount
of work that goes into shows. I think any band would tell you the real
reason they use a bus or need a quiet green room with healthy food is so
they can put on a good show for the fans. We've always been extremely
appreciative of the people that come out to shows. They pay their hard
earned money in hopes of experiencing a band's music in a powerful and
interesting way. I've been at shows where I had a lump in my throat b/c
it was such an amazing experience. These shows have been huge
productions like Roger Water's The Wall as well as small club shows as a
kid. As a band grows in stature and gets more fans, there is a desire to
say thank you by putting on a better show. It is more work and costs
money, but when you experience thousands of people screaming for your
music, especially when they paid to see you, putting the best show
possible is really a privilege.


.. author:: default
.. categories:: music
.. tags:: music
.. comments::
